---
slug: /Why-are-smart-contracts-valuable
id:Why-are-smart-contracts-valuable
title: Why are smart contracts valuable?
sidebar_label:Why are smart contracts valuable?
author: DueDEX CS
author_title: DueDEX
author_url: https://www.duedex.com
author_image_url: https://duedex.zendesk.com/system/photos/3606/0800/5893/twitter4.png
tags: [DueDEX, Bitcoins]
---



A smart contract is a program that is event-driven, stateful, recognized by multiple parties, runs on the blockchain, and can automatically process assets according to preset conditions. The biggest advantage of smart contracts is to use Program algorithm substitutes for arbitration and execution of contracts.
<!--truncate-->


A smart contract is a contract that uses computer language instead of legal language to record terms. Smart contracts can be executed automatically by a computing system. Simply put, smart contracts are digital versions of traditional contracts.

If the blockchain is a database, smart contracts are the application layer that enables blockchain technology to be applied to reality. A smart contract is computer-based contracts runs on a blockchain database and can execute itself when the conditions written in its source code are met. Once a smart contract is written, it can be trusted by users, and the terms of the contract cannot be changed. Once brought up by Vitalik Buterin, it is regarded as the most significant feature on ethereum blockchain.

The turing complete Ethereum smart contracts are also key features to realize business application on Ethereum network, running decentralized applications with usage of digital currency, in this case, ether tokens.

Blockchain smart contracts have three technical characteristics:

**1. Data transparency**

All data on the blockchain is open and transparent, so the data processing of the smart contract is also open and transparent, and any party can view its code and data at runtime.

**2. Cannot be changed**

All data of the blockchain itself cannot be tampered with. Therefore, the smart contract codes deployed on the blockchain and the data output generated by the operation are also non-tamperable. The nodes running the smart contract do not have to worry about other nodes maliciously modifying the code and data.

**3. Permanent operation**

The number of nodes supporting the blockchain network often reaches hundreds or even thousands. The failure of some nodes will not cause the stop of the smart contract, and its reliability is close to permanent operation in theory, which ensures that the smart contract can behave like a paper contract. Effective all the time.

**Application of smart contract**

If the legal currency can be issued through the blockchain, then the code can also be embedded in the act of issuing legal currency through smart contract technology. This part of the legal currency can be called "programmable currency".

For example, if the central bank designates a certain part of funds to be issued to agricultural-related accounts, then it can write the corresponding procedures for this part of funds and specify that this part of funds can only be entered into agricultural-related accounts. Nor can it be misappropriated to other accounts.

As another example, the smart contract related to the house rent agreement will only trigger automatic execution when the owner receives the rent and send the apartment's security key to the tenant. This contract can ensure that the rent is paid regularly and restarted every month.

Smart contracts can be widely used in other fields. The above as just two samples.

**How smart contracts work**

Developers will write code for smart contracts. Smart contracts can be used for transactions and/or any exchange behavior between two or more parties. This code contains some conditions that will trigger the automatic execution of the contract.

Once the coding is completed, the smart contracts will be uploaded to the blockchain network, that is, they will be sent to all devices connected to the network. In the case of another blockchain application-Bitcoin, it is like uploading network updates about Bitcoin transactions to the blockchain.

Once the data is uploaded to all devices, the user can reach an agreement with the result of executing the program code. Then update the database to record the execution of the contract and monitor the terms of the contract to check compliance.

In this way, a single party cannot manipulate the contract, because the control over the execution of the smart contract is not in the hands of any single party.

**Compared with traditional contracts, smart contracts have many advantages:**

1. Compared with traditional contracts, the biggest feature and advantage of smart contracts is that they solve the problem of "credit". Before the conclusion of a traditional contract, participants must first understand the credit background of the parties to select suitable objects. After the conclusion of the contract, they must also rely on the integrity of the parties or introduce a third party (such as Alipay) to guarantee the performance of the contract.

2. Smart contracts because the resources on the chain are true and transparent, the content of the contract cannot be changed after it is confirmed, and the execution does not rely on any additional operations. In the end, "anonymous credit" becomes a reality. There is no need to conduct a credit investigation before the conclusion of the contract, and no third-party guarantee performance is required after the conclusion of the contract. This greatly reduces transaction costs and greatly improves transaction efficiency.

3. The data of the smart contract cannot be deleted or modified, but can only be added. The history of the smart contract can be traced. At the same time, the cost of tampering with the contract or breaching the contract will be high, because its malicious behavior will be recorded and widely known forever.

4. Decentralized smart contracts do not rely on third parties to execute contracts. Therefore, the potential benefits of smart contracts include lowering the costs of signing, executing, and monitoring contracts; therefore, for many contracts related to low-value transactions, this is a significant reduction in labor costs. The entire process of contract verification and execution becomes fast with direct transactions between users.

5. Smart contracts are not prone to power outages, node failures, floods, and fires. When the smart contract is stored on the blockchain distributed ledger, there is no risk of misplacement or loss. This means that every device connected to the network has a copy of the contract and the data will always be stored on the network.
